---
title: Smallpeice 2019
---

Smallpeice 2019 was a summer school that was held from 12th - 16th August 2019.

## Statistics

- 77 student attendees
- 16 teams
- 23 SourceBots volunteers

## Organisation

Organisation of the summer school was led by Dan Trickey, in collaboration with Tyler Ward.

Son Hoang from ECS first helped run the summer school this year.

## Labs

### Electronics

### Python

### Robot Programming

## Competition

The game this year was called [Scavengers](/events/smallpeice/rules/2018.pdf).

### Minileague

This year we ran a mini-league, a short 6 match league. The points did not count.

It was initially scheduled to run at 4.30pm on Thursday, but delayed to start at 4.40pm.

- This allowed volunteers to practice working under the very tight schedule
- The supervisor bot competed in every match.

### League

### Knockouts

## Arena

Due to difficulty obtaining scaffolding, a stage-truss based arena was constructed in the Cube.

- It is perfectly square.
- Volunteers have reported that it was very easy to construct.
- It cost a lot, but was less than the quotes we had for scaffolding this year.

## Tech

### Kit

This year was the first time that `sbot`, a `j5` based kit stack was deployed.

### SRComp

SRComp was used for arena operations. 
This is the first known time that full-stack Python 3 has been used in a real-world deployment.

## Academic Talks

There were 3 academic talks held this year.

!!! warning "Page under construction"
    Barry the Bee has stolen the content from this page and we've yet to put it back!

    Yeah, this page is only partiall written. Sorry.
